Add unloadability howto document (#10256)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/tutorials/unloadability-howto.md

# Using and debugging unloadability in .NET Core
An ability load and later unload a set of assemblies is one of the features that were missing until now in the .NET Core. The desktop .NET has AppDomains that people can use for the purpose of the unloading. Since AppDomains were removed from the .NET Core, how can we achieve that goal there?

The .NET Core 3.0 brings support of unloadability using `AssemblyLoadContext`. You can now load a set of assemblies into an `AssemblyLoadContext`, execute methods in them or just inspect them using reflection and finally unload the `AssemblyLoadContext`. That results in unloading of the assemblies loaded into that `AssemblyLoadContext`.

There is one noteworthy difference between the unloading using `AssemblyLoadContext` and using AppDomains. With AppDomains, the unloading is forced. At the unload time, all threads running in the target AppDomain are aborted, managed COM objects created in the AppDomain that's being unloaded are destroyed, etc. 

> With the new way that uses `AssemblyLoadContext`, the unload is "cooperative". Calling the `Unload` method on the `AssemblyLoadContext` just initiates the unloading. But the unload will not complete until there are no threads having code from the assemblies loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` on their call stacks and until there are no strong references to types from the assemblies loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext`, their instances and the assemblies themselves. And that means that GC needs to collect those first.

Author: "their instances" means instances of the types from the assemblies  ... I can see it is a bit unclear, I'll reword it.

> ## Using unloadable AssemblyLoadContext

Author: Collectible and unloadable AssemblyLoadContext means the same thing. So it is an AssemblyLoadContext created with the isCollectible argument of the constructor set to true. While the underlying features that it uses are collectible Assemblies (which means they can be collected by the GC after the AssemblyLoadContext is unloaded / collected), the term "unloadability" is what people use in connection to the AssemblyLoadContext as in the desktop .NET framework, the equivalent functionality was called AppDomain unloading (it doesn't use collectibility).

> ## Using unloadable AssemblyLoadContext

Author: I am not sure I understand the suggested change, it seems to change the meaning of it. It means "How to use unloadable AssemblyLoadContext", but in your wording, it sounds like an imperative.

> ## Using unloadable AssemblyLoadContext

Author: After giving it more thought, I've changed all references to "unloadable AssemblyLoadContext" to "collectible AssemblyLoadContext". It seems it is really better that way.

You can find a complete sample [at this link](https://github.com/dotnet/samples/tree/master/core/tutorials/Unloading). This section contains step by step detailed tutorial on a simplest way how to load a .NET Core application into an unloadable AssemblyLoadContext, execute its entry point and then unload it.
### How to create an unloadable AssemblyLoadContext
You need to derive your own class from the `AssemblyLoadContext` and overload its Load method. That method is used to resolve references to all assemblies that are dependencies of assemblies loaded into that `AssemblyLoadContext`. 
Here is an example of the simplest custom `AssemblyLoadContext`:
```C#
class TestAssemblyLoadContext : AssemblyLoadContext
{
    public TestAssemblyLoadContext() : base(isCollectible: true)
    {
    }

    protected override Assembly Load(AssemblyName name)
    {
        return null;
    }
}
```
As you can see, the `Load` method returns `null`. That means that all the dependency assemblies are loaded into the default context and only the assemblies explicitly loaded into the new context are in this context. 

> In case you want to load some or all of the dependencies into the `AssemblyLoadContext` too, you can use the `AssemblyDependencyResolver` in the `Load` method. The `AssemblyDependencyResolver` resolves the assembly names to absolute assembly file paths using the *.deps.json file contained in the directory of the main assembly loaded into the context and using assembly files in that directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want to load some or all of the dependencies into the `AssemblyLoadContext` too, you can use the `AssemblyDependencyResolver` in the `Load` method. The `AssemblyDependencyResolver` resolves the assembly names to absolute assembly file paths using the `*.deps.json` file contained in the directory of the main assembly loaded into the context and using assembly files in that directory.
```

Reviewer 2: @jkoritzinsky added a plugin sample for this. Reference it?

Author: Do you mean a sample that uses *.deps.json in some interesting way or a just a sample that uses AssemblyDependencyResolver? If it is the latter, I already have a link above to my own unloadability sample that uses it.

Author: My sample is also in that official sample repo. I've merged it in two days ago. It covers unloadability and since I wanted to make it a boiler plate that people can use, I've used the AssemblyDependencyResolver there too. If you've missed the link in the text above, it is here:
https://github.com/dotnet/samples/tree/master/core/tutorials/Unloading

Reviewer 3: In that case you should use a code reference tag to automatically import the code from the sample like the following

`[!code-csharp[Assembly-load-context-with-assembly-dependency-resolver](~/samples/blob/master/core/tutorials/Unloading/Host/Program.cs)]`

You might also want to seperate out the ALC into a different file to make the code reference work a little cleaner.

Author: I didn't want to include the code from my sample here. I see this doc and the sample as separate entities. This doc focuses on a simple version where the Load method always returns NULL and just mentions the more advanced way briefly so that people know it exist. 
The sample is a separate full blown end to end example of using unloadable ALC that complements this article. I didn't actually know you were working on your sample and frankly even didn't know about the AssemblyDependencyResolver existence when I've completed the first version of my sample and I was originally using just the simple ALC returning NULL from the Load overried. @jkotas then pointed out during review of that sample that it might be nice to make it more complete by adding the usage of the AssemblyDependencyResolver. Thus I've added it there and mentioned it in this doc.

Reviewer 3: That tag is a specially handled by the markdown engine that docs.microsoft.com uses. Github doesn't understand it fully.

```C#
alc.Unload();
```
This should be sufficient to get the test assembly unloaded. Let's actually put all of this into a separate non-inlineable method to ensure that none of the `TestAssemblyLoadContext`, `Assembly` and `MethodInfo` (the `Assembly.EntryPoint`) can be kept alive by stack slot references (real or JIT introduced locals). That could keep the `TestAssemblyLoadContext` alive and prevent the unload from happening.
Let's also return a weak reference to the `AssemblyLoadContext` so that we can use it later to detect unload completion.
```C#
[MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.NoInlining)]
int ExecuteAndUnload(string assemblyPath, out WeakReference alcWeakRef)
{
    var alc = new TestAssemblyLoadContext();
    alcWeakRef = new WeakReference(alc, trackResurrection: true);

    Assembly a = alc.LoadFromAssemblyPath(assemblyPath);

    var args = new object[1] { new string[] {"Hello"}};
    int result = (int)a.EntryPoint.Invoke(null, args);
    alc.Unload();

    return result;
}
```
Now we can run this function to Load, execute and Unload the assembly.
```C#
WeakReference testAlcWeakRef;
int result = ExecuteAndUnload("absolute/path/to/your/assembly", out testAlcWeakRef);
```

> However, the unloading doesn't complete immediately. As I've already mentioned, it relies on GC to collect all the objects from the test assembly (etc.). In many cases, it is not necessary to wait for the unload completion. However there are cases where it is useful to know that the unload has finished. For example, you may want to delete the assembly file that was loaded into the custom context from disk. In such case, the following code snippet can be used. It triggers a GC and waits for pending finalizers in a loop until the weak reference to the custom AssemblyLoadContext is set to null, indicating the target object was collected. Please note that in most cases, just one pass through the loop is required. However for more complex cases where objects created by the code running in the AssemblyLoadContext have finalizers, more passes may be needed.

Reviewer 2: Please remove all uses of "I". In this case, ~~As I've already mentioned,~~ -> "As previously mentioned,"

```C#
for (int i = 0; testAlcWeakRef.IsAlive && (i < 10); i++)
{
    GC.Collect();
    GC.WaitForPendingFinalizers();
}
```
### The Unloading event

> In some cases, it may be necessary for the code loaded into a custom AssemblyLoadContext to perform some cleanup when the unloading is initiated. For example, it may need to stop threads, cleanup some strong GC handles, etc. The `Unloading` event can be used in such cases. A handler that performs the necessary cleanup can be hooked to this event.

Reviewer 2: Unloading should be quoted not back-ticked.

### Troubleshooting unloadability issues
While the previous paragraphs may sound like it is all easy and simple, it is often not the case. Due to the cooperative nature of the unloading, it is easy to forget about references keeping the stuff in the custom AssemblyLoadContext alive and preventing unload. Here is a summary of things (some of them non-obvious) that can hold the references:
* Regular reference held from outside of the custom AssemblyLoadContext  or a strong / pinning GC handle. Such reference may point to:
  * An assembly loaded into the custom `AssemblyLoadContext`
  * Type from such an assembly
  * Instance of a type  from such an assembly
* Threads running code from an assembly loaded into the custom AssemblyLoadContext

> * Instances of non-collectible AssemblyLoadContext

Reviewer 2: We are inconsistent on back-ticks around `AssemblyLoadContext` and types in general.

* Pending RegisteredWaitHandle instances

> The above mentioned reference can come from any object with root in a stack slot or processor register (method locals, either explicitly created by the user code or implicitly by the JIT), a static variable or strong / pinning GC handle. TODO: explain what root means

Reviewer 2: >TODO: explain what roo means

Is there a nice definition in the BOTR we can reference? If not, I would add one there.

Hints to find stack slot / processor register rooting an object
* Passing function call results directly to another function may create a root
* If a reference to an object was available at any point in a method, the JIT might have decided to keep the reference in a stack slot / processor register for as long as it wants in the current function.
## Debugging unloading issues
Debugging issues with unloading can be tedious. You can get into situation where you don't know what can be holding an `AssemblyLoadContext` alive, but the unload fails.
The best weapon to help with that is Windbg (lldb on Unix) with the SOS plugin. We need to find what's keeping a `LoaderAllocator` belonging to the specific `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.
This plugin allows us to look at GC heap objects, their hierarchies and roots. 
To load the plugin into the debugger, enter the following command in the debugger command line:
```
In WinDbg (it seems WinDbg does that automatically when breaking into .NET Core application):
.loadby sos coreclr

In LLDB:
plugin load /path/to/libsosplugin.so
```

> Let's try to debug an example program that has problems with unloading. I have included its source code below. When you run it under WinDbg, the program breaks into the debugger right after attempting to check for the unload success. We can then start looking for the culprits.

Reviewer 2: ~~I have included its source code below~~ -> "Source code is included below."

Here is an example of the output of the `gcroot` command:
```
Thread 4ac:
    000000cf9499dd20 00007ffa7d0236bc example.Program.Main(System.String[]) [E:\unloadability\example\Program.cs @ 70]
        rbp-20: 000000cf9499dd90
            ->  000002b78000d328 System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo
            ->  000002b78000d1f8 System.RuntimeType+RuntimeTypeCache
            ->  000002b78000d1d0 System.RuntimeType
            ->  000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

HandleTable:
    000002b7f8a81198 (strong handle)
    -> 000002b78000d948 test.Test
    -> 000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

    000002b7f8a815f8 (pinned handle)
    -> 000002b790001038 System.Object[]
    -> 000002b78000d390 example.TestInfo
    -> 000002b78000d328 System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo
    -> 000002b78000d1f8 System.RuntimeType+RuntimeTypeCache
    -> 000002b78000d1d0 System.RuntimeType
    -> 000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

Found 3 roots.
```

> Now you need to figure out where is the root located so that you can fix it. The easiest case is when the root is a stack slot or a processor register. In that case, the `gcroot` shows you the name of the function whose frame contains the root and the thread executing that function. The difficult case is when the root is a static variable or a GC handle. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now you need to figure out where the root is located so that you can fix it. The easiest case is when the root is a stack slot or a processor register. In that case, the `gcroot` shows you the name of the function whose frame contains the root and the thread executing that function. The difficult case is when the root is a static variable or a GC handle. 
```

In our example above, the first root is a local of type `System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo` stored in the frame of the function `example.Program.Main(System.String[])` at address `rbp-20` (`rbp` is the processor register `rbp` and -20 is a hexadecimal offset from that register).

> The second root is a normal (strong) `GCHandle` that holds reference to an instance of the `test.Test` class. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The second root is a normal (strong) `GCHandle` that holds a reference to an instance of the `test.Test` class. 
```

The third root is a pinned `GCHandle`. This one is actually a static variable. Unfortunately, there is no way to tell. Statics for reference types are stored in a managed object array in internal runtime structures.

> Another case that can prevent unloading of an `AssemblyLoadContext` is when a thread has a frame of a method from assembly loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` on its stack. You can check that by dumping managed call stacks of all threads:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another case that can prevent unloading of an `AssemblyLoadContext` is when a thread has a frame of a method from an assembly loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` on its stack. You can check that by dumping managed call stacks of all threads:
```

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

~*e !clrstack
```

> The command means "apply to all threads the `!clrstack` command". Here is an example of an output of that command for our example. Unfortunately, LLDB on Unix doesn't have any way to apply a command to all threads, so you'll need to resort to manual switching threads and repeating the `clrstack` command.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The command means "apply to all threads the `!clrstack` command". Here is the output of that command for our example. Unfortunately, LLDB on Unix doesn't have any way to apply a command to all threads, so you'll need to resort to manually switching threads and repeating the `clrstack` command.
```

You should ignore all threads where the debugger says "Unable to walk the managed stack."

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

managed thread. You can run !threads to get a list of managed threads in
the process
Failed to start stack walk: 80070057
OS Thread Id: 0x5ec8 (5)
        Child SP               IP Call Site
0000001fc70ff6e0 00007ffb5437f6e4 [DebuggerU2MCatchHandlerFrame: 0000001fc70ff6e0] 
OS Thread Id: 0x4624 (6)
        Child SP               IP Call Site
GetFrameContext failed: 1
0000000000000000 0000000000000000 
OS Thread Id: 0x60bc (7)
        Child SP               IP Call Site
0000001fc727f158 00007ffb5437fce4 [HelperMethodFrame: 0000001fc727f158] System.Threading.Thread.SleepInternal(Int32)
0000001fc727f260 00007ffb37ea7c2b System.Threading.Thread.Sleep(Int32)
0000001fc727f290 00007ffa865005b3 test.Program.ThreadProc() [E:\unloadability\test\Program.cs @ 17]
0000001fc727f2c0 00007ffb37ea6a5b System.Threading.Thread.ThreadMain_ThreadStart()
0000001fc727f2f0 00007ffadbc4cbe3 System.Threading.ExecutionContext.RunInternal(System.Threading.ExecutionContext, System.Threading.ContextCallback, System.Object)
0000001fc727f568 00007ffae5fdc1e3 [GCFrame: 0000001fc727f568] 
0000001fc727f7f0 00007ffae5fdc1e3 [DebuggerU2MCatchHandlerFrame: 0000001fc727f7f0] 

```

> As you can see the last thread has `test.Program.ThreadProc()`. This is a function from the assembly loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` and so it keeps the `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As you can see, the last thread has `test.Program.ThreadProc()`. This is a function from the assembly loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext`, and so it keeps the `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.
```

## Example source with unloadability issues
This example is used in the debugging above.
### Main testing program

> ```C#

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```csharp
```
But here again, it's best to put this in the samples repo.

# Using and debugging unloadability in .NET Core

> An ability to load and later unload a set of assemblies is one of the features that was missing until now in .NET Core. In .NET Framework, custom app domains are used for this purpose. But since .NET Core supports only a single default app domain, how can we achieve that goal in .NET Core?

Reviewer 5: These first few paragraphs read a lot like a blog post to me. Also, we need to think of topics as future proof. So saying things like now, etc. should be avoided.

A suggestion on how to get this started:

```suggestion
Starting with .NET Core 3.0, the ability to load and later unload a set of assemblies is supported. In .NET Framework, custom app domains were used for this purpose, but .NET Core only supports a single default app domain.
```

> The .NET Core 3.0 supports unloadability through <xref:System.Runtime.Loader.AssemblyLoadContext>. You can load a set of assemblies into a collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`, execute methods in them or just inspect them using reflection, and finally unload the `AssemblyLoadContext`. That unloads the assemblies loaded into that `AssemblyLoadContext`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
.NET Core 3.0 and later versions support unloadability through <xref:System.Runtime.Loader.AssemblyLoadContext>. You can load a set of assemblies into a collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`, execute methods in them or just inspect them using reflection, and finally unload the `AssemblyLoadContext`. That unloads the assemblies loaded into that `AssemblyLoadContext`.
```

There is one noteworthy difference between the unloading using `AssemblyLoadContext` and using AppDomains. With AppDomains, the unloading is forced. At the unload time, all threads running in the target AppDomain are aborted, managed COM objects created in the target AppDomain are destroyed, etc. With `AssemblyLoadContext`, the unload is "cooperative". Calling the <xref:System.Runtime.Loader.AssemblyLoadContext.Unload%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method just initiates the unloading. It does not complete until:

> - No threads have code from the assemblies loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` on their call stacks.

Reviewer 5: Following the sentence as a whole reads a bit weird...

It doesn't complete until no threads have code from the assemblies loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext` on their call stacks.

Author: I've reworded this part to make it easier to understand.

- There are no strong references to types from the assemblies loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext`, instances of those types and the assemblies themselves. The GC needs to collect those first.

> ## Using collectible AssemblyLoadContext

Author: I am not sure what would you like to see here. You can use Visual Studio or just the SDK package with any editor you want. This seems general to any .NET Core development.

As for the section on debugging issues, it already mentions that you'll need WinDbg on Windows or LLDB on Unix.

> ## Using collectible AssemblyLoadContext

Reviewer 5: Yep, but any tutorial that we do we list what are the prereqs.

Here are some examples:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tutorials/with-visual-studio-code#prerequisites
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tutorials/with-visual-studio#prerequisites
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tutorials/using-with-xplat-cli#prerequisites

    }
}
```
As you can see, the `Load` method returns `null`. That means that all the dependency assemblies are loaded into the default context, and the new context contains only the assemblies explicitly loaded into it. 

In case you want to load some or all of the dependencies into the `AssemblyLoadContext` too, you can use the `AssemblyDependencyResolver` in the `Load` method. The `AssemblyDependencyResolver` resolves the assembly names to absolute assembly file paths using the `*.deps.json` file contained in the directory of the main assembly loaded into the context and using assembly files in that directory.
```csharp
class TestAssemblyLoadContext : AssemblyLoadContext
{
    private AssemblyDependencyResolver _resolver;

    public TestAssemblyLoadContext(string mainAssemblyToLoadPath) : base(isCollectible: true)
    {
        _resolver = new AssemblyDependencyResolver(mainAssemblyToLoadPath);
    }

    protected override Assembly Load(AssemblyName name)
    {
        string assemblyPath = _resolver.ResolveAssemblyToPath(name);
        if (assemblyPath != null)
        {
            return LoadFromAssemblyPath(assemblyPath);
        }

        return null;
    }
}

> ```

Author: Ah, got it, after installing the doc authoring pack, it complains that there should be an empty line after that.

### Use a custom collectible AssemblyLoadContext
This section assumes the simpler version of the `TestAssemblyLoadContext` is being used.

> You can create an instance of the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` and load an assembly into it as follows:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can create an instance of the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` and load an assembly into it as follows:

```

```csharp
var alc = new TestAssemblyLoadContext();
Assembly a = alc.LoadFromAssemblyPath("absolute/path/to/your/assembly");

> ```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

```

For each of the assemblies referenced by the loaded assembly, the `TestAssemblyLoadContext.Load` method is called so that the `TestAssemblyLoadContext` can decide where to get the assembly from. In our case, it returns `null` to indicate that it should be loaded into the default context from locations that the runtime uses to load assemblies by default.

> Now that we have loaded an assembly, we can execute a method from it. Let's run the `Main` method:

Reviewer 5: We don't use we in our content, unless it's a Microsoft recommendation. Suggestion:

```suggestion
Now that an assembly was loaded, you can execute a method from it. Run the `Main` method:
```

```csharp
var args = new object[1] {new string[] {"Hello"}};
int result = (int)a.EntryPoint.Invoke(null, args);
```

> After the `Main` method returns, we can initiate unloading by either calling the `Unload` method on the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` or getting rid of the reference we have to the `AssemblyLoadContext`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

After the `Main` method returns, you can initiate unloading by either calling the `Unload` method on the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` or getting rid of the reference you have to the `AssemblyLoadContext`:
```

```csharp
alc.Unload();
```

> This is sufficient to unload the test assembly. Let's actually put all of this into a separate non-inlineable method to ensure that the `TestAssemblyLoadContext`, `Assembly` and `MethodInfo` (the `Assembly.EntryPoint`) can't be kept alive by stack slot references (real- or JIT-introduced locals). That could keep the `TestAssemblyLoadContext` alive and prevent the unload.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

This is sufficient to unload the test assembly. Let's actually put all of this into a separate non-inlineable method to ensure that the `TestAssemblyLoadContext`, `Assembly`, and `MethodInfo` (the `Assembly.EntryPoint`) can't be kept alive by stack slot references (real- or JIT-introduced locals). That could keep the `TestAssemblyLoadContext` alive and prevent the unload.
```

> Let's also return a weak reference to the `AssemblyLoadContext` so that we can use it later to detect unload completion.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Also, return a weak reference to the `AssemblyLoadContext` so that you can use it later to detect unload completion.
```

```csharp
[MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.NoInlining)]
int ExecuteAndUnload(string assemblyPath, out WeakReference alcWeakRef)
{
    var alc = new TestAssemblyLoadContext();
    alcWeakRef = new WeakReference(alc, trackResurrection: true);

    Assembly a = alc.LoadFromAssemblyPath(assemblyPath);

    var args = new object[1] { new string[] {"Hello"}};
    int result = (int)a.EntryPoint.Invoke(null, args);
    alc.Unload();

    return result;
}
```

> Now we can run this function to load, execute, and unload the assembly.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

Now you can run this function to load, execute, and unload the assembly.
```

```csharp
WeakReference testAlcWeakRef;
int result = ExecuteAndUnload("absolute/path/to/your/assembly", out testAlcWeakRef);
```

> However, the unload doesn't complete immediately. As previously mentioned, it relies on the GC to collect all the objects from the test assembly. In many cases, it is not necessary to wait for the unload completion. However there are cases where it is useful to know that the unload has finished. For example, you may want to delete the assembly file that was loaded into the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` from disk. In such a case, the following code snippet can be used. It triggers a GC and waits for pending finalizers in a loop until the weak reference to the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` is set to `null`, indicating the target object was collected. Note that in most cases, just one pass through the loop is required. However for more complex cases where objects created by the code running in the `AssemblyLoadContext` have finalizers, more passes may be needed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

However, the unload doesn't complete immediately. As previously mentioned, it relies on the GC to collect all the objects from the test assembly. In many cases, it isn't necessary to wait for the unload completion. However, there are cases where it's useful to know that the unload has finished. For example, you may want to delete the assembly file that was loaded into the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` from disk. In such a case, the following code snippet can be used. It triggers a GC and waits for pending finalizers in a loop until the weak reference to the custom `AssemblyLoadContext` is set to `null`, indicating the target object was collected. Note that in most cases, just one pass through the loop is required. However, for more complex cases where objects created by the code running in the `AssemblyLoadContext` have finalizers, more passes may be needed.

```

```csharp
for (int i = 0; testAlcWeakRef.IsAlive && (i < 10); i++)
{
    GC.Collect();
    GC.WaitForPendingFinalizers();
}
```

> ### The Unloading event

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

### The Unloading event

```

In some cases, it may be necessary for the code loaded into a custom `AssemblyLoadContext` to perform some cleanup when the unloading is initiated. For example, it may need to stop threads, clean up some strong GC handles, etc. The `Unloading` event can be used in such cases. A handler that performs the necessary cleanup can be hooked to this event.

> ### Troubleshooting unloadability issues

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

### Troubleshoot unloadability issues

```

> Due to the cooperative nature of the unloading, it is easy to forget about references keeping the stuff in a collectible `AssemblyLoadContext` alive and preventing unload. Here is a summary of things (some of them non-obvious) that can hold the references:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Due to the cooperative nature of the unloading, it's easy to forget about references keeping the stuff in a collectible `AssemblyLoadContext` alive and preventing unload. Here is a summary of things (some of them non-obvious) that can hold the references:

```

* Regular references held from outside of the collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`, stored in a stack slot or a processor register (method locals, either explicitly created by the user code or implicitly by the JIT), a static variable or a strong / pinning GC handle, and transitively pointing to:
  * An assembly loaded into the collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`.
  * A type from such an assembly.
  * An instance of a type from such an assembly.
* Threads running code from an assembly loaded into the collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`.
* Instances of custom non-collectible `AssemblyLoadContext` types created inside of the collectible `AssemblyLoadContext`
* Pending <xref:System.Threading.RegisteredWaitHandle> instances with callbacks set to methods in the custom `AssemblyLoadContext`

> Hints to find stack slot / processor register rooting an object:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Hints to find stack slot / processor register rooting an object:

```

* Passing function call results directly to another function may create a root even though there is no user-created local variable.
* If a reference to an object was available at any point in a method, the JIT might have decided to keep the reference in a stack slot / processor register for as long as it wants in the current function.
## Debugging unloading issues
Debugging issues with unloading can be tedious. You can get into situations where you don't know what can be holding an `AssemblyLoadContext` alive, but the unload fails.

> The best weapon to help with that is Windbg (LLDB on Unix) with the SOS plugin. We need to find what's keeping a `LoaderAllocator` belonging to the specific `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The best weapon to help with that is Windbg (LLDB on Unix) with the SOS plugin. You need to find what's keeping a `LoaderAllocator` belonging to the specific `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.
```

> This plugin allows us to look at GC heap objects, their hierarchies and roots. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This plugin allows you to look at GC heap objects, their hierarchies, and roots.
```

To load the plugin into the debugger, enter the following command in the debugger command line:

In WinDbg (it seems WinDbg does that automatically when breaking into .NET Core application):
```console
.loadby sos coreclr
```
In LLDB:
```console
plugin load /path/to/libsosplugin.so
```

> Let's try to debug an example program that has problems with unloading. Source code is included below. When you run it under WinDbg, the program breaks into the debugger right after attempting to check for the unload success. We can then start looking for the culprits.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Let's try to debug an example program that has problems with unloading. Source code is included below. When you run it under WinDbg, the program breaks into the debugger right after attempting to check for the unload success. You can then start looking for the culprits.
```

> Note that if you debug using LLDB on Unix, the SOS commands in the examples below don't have the `!` in front of them.

Reviewer 5: don't use below

```suggestion
Note that if you debug using LLDB on Unix, the SOS commands in the following examples don't have the `!` in front of them.

```

```console
!dumpheap -type LoaderAllocator
```

> It will dump all objects with a type name containing `LoaderAllocator` that are in the GC heap. Here is an example:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This command dumps all objects with a type name containing `LoaderAllocator` that are in the GC heap. Here is an example:
```

```console
         Address               MT     Size
000002b78000ce40 00007ffadc93a288       48     
000002b78000ceb0 00007ffadc93a218       24     

Statistics:
              MT    Count    TotalSize Class Name
00007ffadc93a218        1           24 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocatorScout
00007ffadc93a288        1           48 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator
Total 2 objects
```
In the "Statistics:" part below, check the `MT` (`MethodTable`) belonging to the `System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator`, which is the object we care about. Then in the list at the beginning, find the entry with `MT` matching that one and get the address of the object itself. In our case, it is "000002b78000ce40"

Now that we know the address of the `LoaderAllocator` object, we can use another command to find its GC roots
```console
!gcroot -all 0x000002b78000ce40 
```

> This will dump the chain of object references that lead to the `LoaderAllocator` instance. The list starts with the root, which is the entity that keeps our `LoaderAllocator` alive and thus is the core of the problem we are debugging. The root can be a stack slot, a processor register, a GC handle, or a static variable.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This command dumps the chain of object references that lead to the `LoaderAllocator` instance. The list starts with the root, which is the entity that keeps our `LoaderAllocator` alive and thus is the core of the problem you're debugging. The root can be a stack slot, a processor register, a GC handle, or a static variable.
```

Here is an example of the output of the `gcroot` command:
```console
Thread 4ac:
    000000cf9499dd20 00007ffa7d0236bc example.Program.Main(System.String[]) [E:\unloadability\example\Program.cs @ 70]
        rbp-20: 000000cf9499dd90
            ->  000002b78000d328 System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo
            ->  000002b78000d1f8 System.RuntimeType+RuntimeTypeCache
            ->  000002b78000d1d0 System.RuntimeType
            ->  000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

HandleTable:
    000002b7f8a81198 (strong handle)
    -> 000002b78000d948 test.Test
    -> 000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

    000002b7f8a815f8 (pinned handle)
    -> 000002b790001038 System.Object[]
    -> 000002b78000d390 example.TestInfo
    -> 000002b78000d328 System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo
    -> 000002b78000d1f8 System.RuntimeType+RuntimeTypeCache
    -> 000002b78000d1d0 System.RuntimeType
    -> 000002b78000ce40 System.Reflection.LoaderAllocator

Found 3 roots.
```

> Now you need to figure out where the root is located so that you can fix it. The easiest case is when the root is a stack slot or a processor register. In that case, the `gcroot` shows you the name of the function whose frame contains the root and the thread executing that function. The difficult case is when the root is a static variable or a GC handle. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Now you need to figure out where the root is located so you can fix it. The easiest case is when the root is a stack slot or a processor register. In that case, the `gcroot` shows you the name of the function whose frame contains the root and the thread executing that function. The difficult case is when the root is a static variable or a GC handle. 
```

> In our example above, the first root is a local of type `System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo` stored in the frame of the function `example.Program.Main(System.String[])` at address `rbp-20` (`rbp` is the processor register `rbp` and -20 is a hexadecimal offset from that register).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the previous example, the first root is a local of type `System.Reflection.RuntimeMethodInfo` stored in the frame of the function `example.Program.Main(System.String[])` at address `rbp-20` (`rbp` is the processor register `rbp` and -20 is a hexadecimal offset from that register).
```

OS Thread Id: 0x4624 (6)
        Child SP               IP Call Site
GetFrameContext failed: 1
0000000000000000 0000000000000000 
OS Thread Id: 0x60bc (7)
        Child SP               IP Call Site
0000001fc727f158 00007ffb5437fce4 [HelperMethodFrame: 0000001fc727f158] System.Threading.Thread.SleepInternal(Int32)
0000001fc727f260 00007ffb37ea7c2b System.Threading.Thread.Sleep(Int32)
0000001fc727f290 00007ffa865005b3 test.Program.ThreadProc() [E:\unloadability\test\Program.cs @ 17]
0000001fc727f2c0 00007ffb37ea6a5b System.Threading.Thread.ThreadMain_ThreadStart()
0000001fc727f2f0 00007ffadbc4cbe3 System.Threading.ExecutionContext.RunInternal(System.Threading.ExecutionContext, System.Threading.ContextCallback, System.Object)
0000001fc727f568 00007ffae5fdc1e3 [GCFrame: 0000001fc727f568] 
0000001fc727f7f0 00007ffae5fdc1e3 [DebuggerU2MCatchHandlerFrame: 0000001fc727f7f0] 

```
As you can see, the last thread has `test.Program.ThreadProc()`. This is a function from the assembly loaded into the `AssemblyLoadContext`, and so it keeps the `AssemblyLoadContext` alive.
## Example source with unloadability issues
This example is used in the debugging above.
### Main testing program

> ```csharp

Author: I have a pending PR to put all the snippets into that repo. After it is approved and merged, I'll update this doc to not to have any inline code.
